First draft for JOSS paper (#70)
JuliaDynamics/TransitionsInTimeseries.jl: paper/paper.md

---
title: 'TransitionInTimeSeries.jl: A performant, extensible and reliable software for
reproducible detection and prediction of transitions in timeseries'
tags:
  - Julia
  - nonlinear dynamics
  - timeseries analysis
  - change point detection
  - resilience loss
  - critical slowing down
  - early warning signals
authors:
  - name: Jan Swierczek-Jereczek
    orcid: 0000-0003-2213-0423
    affiliation: "1, 2"
  - name: George Datseris
    orcid: 0000-0003-0872-7098
    affiliation: 3
affiliations:
 - name: Department of Earth Physics and Astrophysics, Complutense University of Madrid.
   index: 1
 - name: Geosciences Institute, CSIC-UCM.
   index: 2
 - name: University of Exeter.
   index: 3
date: 13 February 2024
bibliography: paper.bib
---

> # Summary

Author: Yes! Rephrased in the new version

Changes in the regime of a nonlinear dynamical system can significantly impact individuals
and society. Examples of this are ubiquitous and include the onset of cardiac arythmia
[@tse_mechanisms_2016], the deglaciation of Earth about 20,000 years ago [@wolff_changes_2010]
and the recent price collapse of many cryptocurrencies [@ismail_detecting_2020]. The systems
displaying such dramatic events are therefore usually monitored by measuring state variables
that are believed to be representative of the underlying process. The resulting timeseries
can be analysed with a wide range of generic techniques to detect past events and predict
future ones. 

> # Statement of need

Author: Yes! Modified in the new version

Over the last decades, methods to detect and predict transitions from timeseries have gained
a lot of attention, both inside and outside of the scientific community. For instance, recent
work predicting a collapse of the Atlantic Meridional Overturning Circulation between 2025
and 2095 has led to no less than 870 news outlets and 4100 tweets [@ditlevsen_warning_2023],
largely because of the substantial implications of such a collapse for human societies.

> However, some published work is not reproducible despite their strong policy implications.

Author: This paper provides open-source R code that should be reproducible, but I did not check myself. I mention this one because it had the biggest impact in popular media to my knowledge.

> However, some published work is not reproducible despite their strong policy implications.

Reviewer: Sure, but the problem is that we are making a definitive statement: "some published work is not reproducible despite ..." . How do we substantiate this in the scientific sense?

We can argue instead: "A common concern in the scientific community is that published work on the topic is difficult to reproduce, despite the impact it implies for humanity." which doesn't assert a definitive statement, but would still be acceptable by pretty much everyone.

We believe that this can largely be adressed by a unifying software and therefore propose
TransitionsInTimeseries.jl, which offers many additional advantages.

# TransitionsInTimeseries.jl

> ## Accessibility

Author: Yes! Included in the new version

TransitionsInTimeseries.jl is accesible to any scientist thanks to the convenience functions
it provides to detect and predict transitions in timeseries with only a few lines of code. A
frequent prediction technique relies on observing, prior to a transition, an increase of the
variance and the AR1 regression coefficient of the detrended time series, which is a
consequence of Critical Slowing Down (CSD, [@scheffer_early-warning_2009]) and is here
measured by the Kendall's $\tau$ coefficient. To assess whether this increase is significant,
one can perform a statistical test, for instance by performing the same computations on 1,000

> surrogates of the original timeseries. The increase in variance and AR1 coefficient can be

Author: It is cited in the Integration section, which I believe is a bit more appropriate. Do you have strong feelings about this?

> surrogates of the original timeseries. The increase in variance and AR1 coefficient can be

Reviewer: Yes, cite it here as well. The word surrogate is introduced without being defined explicitly so a citation needs to be attached.

flags = significant_transitions(results, signif)

# A minimal visualisation of the results
fig = plot_changes_significance(results, signif)
```

We apply this code to data generated by a Ricker model presenting an abrupt transition
at $t = 860$, which is used in the first tutorial of `ewstools` [@bury_ewstools_2023],
the most recent software with functionalities that are similar to TransitionsInTimeseries.jl.
The results are shown in [Fig. 1](@figure1) and display, as expected from CSD theory, an
increase in both variance and AR1 coefficient, which is exactly the same as computed
by `ewstools`. However, calling `signif.pvalues` shows that the increase in variance is not
significant ($p = 0.284$), whereas the increase in AR1 coefficient is ($p = 0.001$).

![Output of plotting function in usage example.\label{fig: fig1}](figures/figure1.png)

We believe that a concise and unambiguous code will greatly reduce the programming effort of
many researchers and ease the code reviewing process. Finally, the code documentation
provides additional examples, showcasing that the simplicity of the code also applies to
real-world applications.

> ## Performance

Reviewer: I think we can shorten this section: just say that every step has been explicitly optimized and parallelized when possible (e.g., when computing timeseries surrogates for testing for significance). Explicitly refer to the performance comparison later on.

optimized. Significance testing can be the main bottleneck and was therefore parallelised, 
which simply requires the user to activate more threads in their Julia REPL. This is of
particular importance since the transition analysis is sometimes performed on 10,000+
timeseries [@ben-yami_uncertainties_2023], which can last hours with a serial code that is
not optimized.

## Reproducibility

Some steps of a transition analysis involve random number generators, which need 
to be handled with care in parallelized codes. This is done in TransitionsInTimeseries.jl, 
which offers the possibility of seeding a random number generator by using the 
keywordargument `rng`, as done in the example shown above. Furthermore, 
TransitionsInTimeseries.jl follows the guidelines of semantic versionning which, 
along with Julia's integrated package manager, ensures that the same code is used for both 
results generation and peer reviewing.

## Reliability

In high-impact context mentioned above, errors are to be avoided with particular care.
TransitionsInTimeseries.jl is therefore tested via continuous integration on a large test

> suite, thus providing a reliable research framework. Furthermore, a centralised code base

Reviewer: If we talk about the centralized code here, in the "statement of need" section we should say that "our vision with this software is to become the established standard, widely used by most academics working on transitions in timeseries".

Author: Yes! I rephrased this in the new commits.

implies that any new user is a new test, thus increasing the reliability of the code over
time. Finally, the robustness of the results with respect to a parameter, e.g. the width
of the sliding window, can be easily studied thanks to the simple syntax, thus contributing
to the reliability of the results.

## Versatility

TransitionsInTimeseries.jl detaches the degrees of freedom that are available to the user

> from the analysis pipeline. Methods for detection and prediction can thus be applied equally

Author: I agree but I struggle in explaining it in a concise way. We are already beyond the max number of words...

> from the analysis pipeline. Methods for detection and prediction can thus be applied equally

Reviewer: We should worry about the limit after submission. If they complain we can cut out the least important sections completely.

But for this particular point I think we can just say "can be used for either hindcast or forecast " , which, I personally do not find noteworthy as anything like that could be used for either as it's a matter of perspective.

> from the analysis pipeline. Methods for detection and prediction can thus be applied equally

Author: Ok for word limit!

Hindcast and detection are not the same. Whereas people doing hindcasting obviously need to detect a transition, some might just want to do the detection without the hindcasting. I personally find the formulation of the current version understandable, since prediction and detection are better introduced from the beginning

the timeseries. This is of great importance, since a new prediction technique needs to first
be tested on hindcasting tasks, which requires a reliable detection and timing
of previous transitions. To illustrate this, a detection task can be performed by merely
modifying the indicators, change metrics and window type of the code shown above:

```julia
# Here the data should not be detrended
time, data = load_data()

indicators = (nothing, nothing)
change_metrics = (difference_of_mean(), difference_of_max())
config = SlidingWindowConfig(indicators, change_metrics;
    width_cha = 50, whichtime = midpoint)
```

This example showcases that steps of the analysis pipeline can be skipped alltogether, as
done here for the computation of indicators. This is not needed here, since the change
metric of the original time series is already sufficient to detect a transition by comparing
the difference in mean and maximum values between the two halves of the sliding window.
Furthermore, different ways of testing for significance can be interchangeably used,
therefore expanding the versatility of the software beyond the surrogate analysis.

> ## Extensibility

Reviewer: This section misses that it is easy to add completely new ways of estimating changes, as in making new `IndicatorChangesConfig`.

Author: I am not sure to have fully understood what you mean but I added what I got :)

---
title: 'TransitionInTimeSeries.jl: A performant, extensible and reliable software for
reproducible detection and prediction of transitions in time series'
tags:
 - Julia
 - nonlinear dynamics
 - time series analysis
 - change point detection
 - resilience loss
 - critical slowing down
 - early warning signals
authors:
 - name: Jan Swierczek-Jereczek
   orcid: 0000-0003-2213-0423
   affiliation: "1, 2"
 - name: George Datseris
   orcid: 0000-0003-0872-7098
   affiliation: 3
affiliations:
- name: Department of Earth Physics and Astrophysics, Complutense University of Madrid.
  index: 1
- name: Geosciences Institute, CSIC-UCM.
  index: 2
- name: Department of Mathematics and Statistics, University of Exeter.
  index: 3
date: 13 February 2024
bibliography: paper.bib
---

# Summary

Transitions of nonlinear dynamical systems can significantly impact individuals
and society. Examples of this are ubiquitous and include the onset of cardiac arrhythmia
[@tse_mechanisms_2016], the deglaciation of Earth about 20,000 years ago [@wolff_changes_2010]
and the recent price collapse of many cryptocurrencies [@ismail_detecting_2020]. The systems

> displaying such transitions are therefore usually monitored by measuring state variables

Reviewer: ```suggestion
displaying such transitions are usually monitored by measuring state variables
```

that are believed to be representative of the underlying process. Researchers analyze the

> resulting time series with various methods to detect past transitions and predict

Reviewer: ```suggestion
resulting timeseries with various methods to detect past transitions and predict
```

I've taken it my personal crusade to replace the words "time series" with "timeseries" in the NLD literature.

future ones.

# Statement of need

Over the last decades, methods to detect and predict transitions from time series have gained
a lot of attention, both inside and outside of the scientific community. For instance, recent
work predicting a collapse of the Atlantic Meridional Overturning Circulation between 2025
and 2095 has led to no less than 870 news outlets and 4100 tweets [@ditlevsen_warning_2023],
largely because of the substantial implications of such a collapse for human societies.
However, some published work is not reproducible despite their strong policy implications.
This can be largely addressed by a unifying software that is accessible, performant,

> reproducible, reliable and extensible, and we therefore propose TransitionsInTimeseries.jl.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
reproducible, reliable and extensible. Such a software does not exist yet, but here 
we propose TransitionsInTimeseries.jl to fill this gap.
```

We believe this is a major step towards establishing a software as standard, widely used

> by academics working on transitions in time series.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
by academics working on transitions in timeseries.
```

# TransitionsInTimeseries.jl

## Accessibility

### Fully open-source

> TransitionsInTimeseries.jl is a free and fully open-source software written in Julia and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
TransitionsInTimeseries.jl is a free and open-source software written in Julia and
```

open-sourceness is binary in nature. You can only be "fully" open source.

developed on GitHub, which allows any user to track the full history of the changes made
to the software as well as to suggest new ones by opening a pull request or an issue.

### Ease of use

TransitionsInTimeseries.jl is accessible to any scientist thanks to the convenience functions

> it provides to detect and predict transitions in time series

Reviewer: ```suggestion
it provides to detect and predict transitions in timeseries
```
Please do a mass search and replace `time series` to `timeseries`

documentation provides a thorough API description as well as additional examples,
showcasing that the simplicity of the code also applies to real-world applications.

## Performance

TransitionsInTimeseries.jl is written in Julia, which offers both a simple syntax and good
performance. Additionally, all performance-relevant steps have been optimized and
parallelized when possible, as, for instance, the significance testing relying on surrogates.
In the final section of this article, we present a comparison to `ewstools`, showing that
TransitionsInTimeseries.jl offers a significant speed-up in all the studied cases.

## Reproducibility

Some steps of a transition analysis involve random number generators, which need
to be handled with care in parallelized codes. This is done in TransitionsInTimeseries.jl,
which offers the possibility of seeding a random number generator by using the
keyword argument `rng`, as done in the example shown above. Furthermore,
TransitionsInTimeseries.jl follows the guidelines of semantic versioning which,
along with Julia's integrated package manager, ensures that the same code is used for both
results generation and peer reviewing.

## Reliability

> In high-impact context mentioned above, errors are to be avoided with particular care.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In high-impact context mentioned in the introduction, it is crucial to avoid errors.
```

of previous transitions. To illustrate this, a detection task can be performed by merely
modifying the indicators, change metrics and window type of the code shown above:

```julia
# Here the data should not be detrended
time, data = load_data()

indicators = (nothing, nothing)
change_metrics = (difference_of_mean(), difference_of_max())
config = SlidingWindowConfig(indicators, change_metrics;
   width_cha = 50, whichtime = midpoint)
```

This example showcases that steps of the analysis pipeline can be skipped altogether, as
done here for the computation of indicators, since the change
metric of the original time series is already sufficient to detect a transition by comparing
the difference in mean and maximum values between the two halves of the sliding window.
Furthermore, the user can define their own `IndicatorChangesConfig` - for instance instead of
`SlidingWindowConfig` - and are therefore capable of adding new ways of computing the
relevant metrics. Finally, different ways of testing for significance can be interchangeably
used, therefore expanding the versatility of the software beyond the surrogate analysis.

> ## Extensibility

Reviewer: I am still unhappy about this section. Even though it is extensive, the most extensive subsection, it still does not discuss the biggest novelty of our software: that entirely new pipelines for estimating changes, or estimating their significance, can be added to the software. 

You can save lots of space here by using only two sentences to mention that idicators and change metrics are arbitrary julia functions, which means that they could be defined by the user or imported form any other package.

This extra space can be used to highlight the novelty of new pipelines, like what I contributed in #73 .

An important aspect of the modularity mentioned above, is that self-written functions can be
passed as indicators or change metrics to the analysis pipeline. Thus, researchers can easily
test new methods without any programming overhead, nor modification of the source code. To
illustrate this, the code shown above can include the skewness as indicator of the
transition by modifying a few lines:

```julia
skewness(x::Vector) = mean( (x .- mean(x))^3 ) / mean( (x .- mean(x))^2 )^1.5
indicators = (var, ar1_whitenoise, skewness)
change_metrics = (RidgeRegressionSlope(), RidgeRegressionSlope(), RidgeRegressionSlope())
```

There is no complexity restriction on the self-programmed functions, as long as they comply

> with the structure of taking a vector as input and returning a scalar as output. Finally,
> users can modify the fully-open source code, written in native Julia and thus offering a good
> legibility compared to other high-performance languages.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
with the structure of taking a vector as input and returning a scalar as output.
```
I don't think that's important to mention, it is obvious and not of high impact. We can save some words here.

## Integration

TransitionsInTimeseries.jl is designed to be well integrated into the Julia ecosystem.
Functions can be imported from other packages and subsequently passed as indicators or
change metrics. For instance, the skewness implemented above can be loaded from another julia
package instead of being programmed by the user:

```julia
using StatsBase
indicators = (var, ar1_whitenoise, StatsBase.skewness)
```

TransitionsInTimeseries.jl therefore offers an extremely wide and
potentially unlimited library of indicators. Furthermore, TimeseriesSurrogates.jl
[@haaga_timeseriessurrogatesjl_2022] is used to create surrogates of the time series,
thus offering optimized routines with numerous surrogate types. Finally,
`plot_changes_significance` showcased in [Fig. 1](@figure1) relies on Makie.jl, which allows

> the user to customize the figures according to their needs.

Reviewer: I think all of this section is too large and should be significantly decreased in size. Above comment says how to mention impoting functions from other packages. And we definitely do not need a code example for using functions from other packages.

Makie.jl is **not an integration**. Iti s a dependency. Its not like the user can interface with the plotting code in any meaningful way. 

You can mention the surrogate integration though.

Reviewer: p.s.: We can add the skewness example to the main tutorial to show defining user defined functions or importing new ones.

# Comparison to already existing alternatives

`earlywarnings` [@dakos_methods_2012] and `spatialwarnings` are toolboxes written in R

> providing many tools to predict transitions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
providing a few tools to predict transitions.
```
They do not provide "many" tools if they provide only the standard CDS stuff and they are not extendable.

Author: `spatialwarnings` provides method that are not CSD. I think the use of "many" is justified and it still does not changes the fact that our software is extensible, contrary to `spatialwarnings`.
